---
layout: post
title: "Me, me, me"
date: "2004-04-25"
type: post
lang: en
ref: moi
published: true
status: publish
---



Textbooks tell you that "I" or "me" is translated by _watashi_ (私) in Japanese. This is true, but incomplete. There are indeed a lot of words or expressions to designate the first person.

_boku_ (僕) is used only by men, and is more familiar. But also considered as "cute" when used by young boys.

_ore_ (俺) also exclusively masculine, is more familiar than _boku_, and to avoid if not wanting to be rude (however, _ore_ is rather "cool" among young people, and more widely used by men when they are among themselves).

_atashi_ (あたし) is a woman-only variation of _watashi_. It stresses the female side of who uses it.

_washi_ (わし) is one more variation of _watashi_, but used by elderly men. This expression is appropriate for grizzled pappies.

_watakushi_ (私) is a very polite expression, which can even become conceited at times. It is however commonly used at work, especially when speaking to a customer.

_atakushi_ (あたくし) is a femal variation of _watakushi_

And this list is probably not complete. There are plenty of useful words like _uchi_ or _kochi_ (which literally mean "at home" and "over here"), which can also be used to speak of oneself. There is also _wa ga hai_ (我が輩, like in the famous play of _Natsume Sohseki_, _wa ga hai ha neko de aru_ : "I am a cat"); although nobody uses this aged expression, _wa ga ya_ (我家) is still used to say "at my home"...

Finally, I must say that I don't know why there are so many ways to speak of oneself in Japanese. If you have an idea, I'd be happy to hear it.


